Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
premedication and pharmacological adjuncts.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss premedication and pharmacological adjuncts.
What are the aims of premedication?
Premedication is the administration of drugs before anaesthesia to prepare the
patient and facilitate the anaesthetic.
Its aims are often summarised as a series of words beginning with the letter A:
anxiolysis, the relief of preoperative anxiety; amnesia; analgesia;
antisialagogue effect, the drying of secretions; antiemesis,
the prevention of nausea and vomiting; antacid effect or aspiration prophylaxis;
and the attenuation of autonomic reflexes and the stress response.
To these may be added the reduction of anaesthetic requirements and the
continuation of the patient's essential regular medications.
Modern practice, especially in day surgery,
has moved away from routine heavy sedative premedication towards a selective,
individualised approach, reserving specific premedicants for specific indications.
So premedication serves anxiolysis, amnesia, analgesia, antisialagogue, antiemetic,
antacid and autonomic-attenuating aims,
applied selectively to the individual patient rather than routinely.
Describe the use of benzodiazepines for premedication.
The benzodiazepines are the classic anxiolytic premedicants,
acting at the GABA-A receptor to enhance inhibitory neurotransmission,
producing anxiolysis, sedation and anterograde amnesia without analgesia.
Midazolam is the most used, being water-soluble,
short-acting and giving reliable anxiolysis and amnesia; it can be given orally,
particularly to children, or intravenously immediately before transfer.
Temazepam and lorazepam are longer-acting oral agents,
lorazepam giving prolonged anxiolysis and amnesia.
Their advantages are effective anxiolysis and amnesia;
their drawbacks are sedation that may delay recovery,
respiratory depression particularly with opioids and in the elderly and those with
respiratory disease, and occasional paradoxical disinhibition,
especially in children and the elderly.
They are reversible with flumazenil. So the benzodiazepines, chiefly midazolam,
provide anxiolysis and amnesia as premedication,
used judiciously because of sedation and respiratory depression,
particularly avoiding them in the frail elderly and where prompt recovery is wanted.
What is the role of the alpha-two agonists as premedicants and adjuncts?
The alpha-two adrenoceptor agonists, clonidine and dexmedetomidine,
are valuable premedicants and adjuncts because they provide sedation,
anxiolysis and analgesia and attenuate the sympathetic stress response,
while sparing anaesthetic and opioid requirements and causing little respiratory
depression.
As premedication they reduce anxiety and the haemodynamic response to laryngoscopy;
clonidine can be given orally, dexmedetomidine by infusion.
As intraoperative adjuncts they reduce anaesthetic and analgesic needs,
blunt haemodynamic surges, prolong regional blocks when added to local anaesthetic,
and dexmedetomidine provides a cooperative, rousable sedation.
Their drawbacks are bradycardia, hypotension and sedation,
and clonidine causes rebound hypertension on abrupt withdrawal.
They are also useful for emergence agitation in children and for postoperative
shivering.
So the alpha-two agonists provide sedation, anxiolysis,
analgesia and stress-response attenuation as premedicants and adjuncts,
limited by bradycardia and hypotension.
Describe the antisialagogues and their indications.
The antisialagogues are antimuscarinic drugs given to reduce salivary and airway
secretions, and they also have an antiemetic effect and block vagally-mediated
bradycardia. The agents are glycopyrronium, atropine and hyoscine.
Glycopyrronium is the usual choice,
a quaternary compound that does not cross the blood-brain barrier,
giving a good drying effect with little central effect and less tachycardia than
atropine.
Atropine has a faster onset and more marked tachycardia and crosses into the brain,
occasionally causing central anticholinergic effects.
Hyoscine, also centrally active, is a good antisialagogue with sedative and
antiemetic properties but can cause confusion, particularly in the elderly.
Their indications now are chiefly to dry secretions for airway procedures such as
awake fibreoptic intubation and in shared-airway surgery,
and to block the vagal response in certain situations, rather than routinely.
So the antisialagogues, chiefly glycopyrronium,
dry secretions for airway work and block vagal reflexes, used selectively.
How is analgesia incorporated into premedication and the perioperative plan?
Analgesia is increasingly given pre-emptively and as part of a multimodal,
opioid-sparing plan beginning before surgery.
Simple analgesics — paracetamol and, where not contraindicated,
a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug — are commonly given preoperatively so that
effective levels are present at emergence.
The gabapentinoids, gabapentin and pregabalin,
have been used as analgesic adjuncts for their effect on neuropathic and acute
pain, though enthusiasm has waned because of sedation,
dizziness and limited benefit with added harm in some settings,
so their routine use is now questioned.
Opioids are generally given as part of the anaesthetic rather than as sedative
premedication. Regional and local techniques are planned.
The aim is to have multimodal analgesia established by the end of surgery.
So analgesia is incorporated as pre-emptive multimodal therapy — paracetamol,
a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug where appropriate,
regional techniques — with the gabapentinoids now used more cautiously.
Describe premedication in children.
Premedication in children addresses the particular problem of preoperative anxiety
and the distress of separation and induction,
and aims for a calm child who accepts induction.
The mainstay is oral midazolam, given some twenty to thirty minutes before,
providing anxiolysis and amnesia, though it can occasionally cause paradoxical
agitation.
Oral or intranasal ketamine, and oral clonidine or dexmedetomidine,
are alternatives, the alpha-two agonists also reducing emergence agitation.
A topical local anaesthetic cream, such as a eutectic mixture or amethocaine,
is applied to anaesthetise the skin for cannulation.
Non-pharmacological measures — parental presence, play,
distraction and a calm environment — are central and often as important as drugs.
So paediatric premedication relies on oral midazolam,
with ketamine and the alpha-two agonists as alternatives,
topical local anaesthetic for cannulation,
and a strong emphasis on non-pharmacological preparation and parental presence.
What drugs are used to attenuate the stress response, and when?
The surgical stress response — the sympathetic,
hormonal and metabolic reaction to surgery — can be attenuated pharmacologically
where its consequences are harmful,
as in the patient with cardiac disease in whom the tachycardia and hypertension of
laryngoscopy or surgery risk ischaemia.
Beta-blockers, such as esmolol, blunt the heart-rate and pressure response;
the alpha-two agonists clonidine and dexmedetomidine reduce sympathetic outflow;
opioids, particularly remifentanil, obtund the response to laryngoscopy;
and adequate depth of anaesthesia and local or regional anaesthesia reduce the
afferent stimulus.
The aim is to protect the at-risk patient from the ischaemic and other consequences
of the stress response.
So the stress response is attenuated, where indicated, with beta-blockers,
alpha-two agonists, opioids such as remifentanil, and regional techniques,
principally to protect the patient with cardiovascular disease from perioperative
ischaemia.
Which regular medications should be continued, and which adjusted, around surgery?
Most regular medications are continued through surgery to maintain control and
avoid withdrawal, and this is an important part of premedication.
Cardiovascular drugs — beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers,
most antihypertensives, statins and antianginals — are generally continued,
beta-blockers and clonidine particularly so to avoid rebound,
though the renin-angiotensin blockers and diuretics are often omitted on the day.
Antiepileptics, antiparkinsonian drugs,
inhalers and most psychotropics are continued.
Important adjustments include the management of anticoagulants and antiplatelets,
of diabetic medications — with adjustment of insulin and withholding of certain
oral agents and the SGLT2 inhibitors — and of corticosteroids,
which may need supplementation.
So the principle is to continue most regular drugs,
with key exceptions and adjustments for the anticoagulants, antidiabetic agents,
corticosteroids, and the renin-angiotensin blockers and diuretics,
which is a core element of preoperative pharmacological preparation.
What intraoperative pharmacological adjuncts are commonly used, and why?
A number of adjuncts are given intraoperatively to improve analgesia,
reduce nausea and opioid use, and attenuate responses.
Dexamethasone is given at induction for its antiemetic effect and a degree of
analgesia. Antiemetics are given prophylactically to those at risk.
Intravenous paracetamol and, where appropriate,
a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug provide multimodal analgesia.
Magnesium reduces anaesthetic and analgesic requirements and has antiarrhythmic
effects.
Lidocaine infusion has analgesic, anti-inflammatory and bowel-recovery benefits in
some surgery. Ketamine in low dose provides analgesia and reduces opioid
requirements and may reduce chronic pain.
The alpha-two agonists spare anaesthetic and opioid needs and attenuate the stress
response.
So intraoperative adjuncts — dexamethasone, antiemetics, paracetamol,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, magnesium, lidocaine,
ketamine and alpha-two agonists — are used as part of multimodal, opioid-sparing,
response-attenuating anaesthesia.
What are the risks and contraindications of sedative premedication?
Sedative premedication carries real risks that have led to its more selective use.
The principal hazard is excessive sedation and respiratory depression,
particularly with benzodiazepines and opioids combined, in the elderly,
in those with respiratory disease or obstructive sleep apnoea, and in the frail,
in whom it can cause hypoventilation and airway obstruction before monitoring is
established.
It can cause delayed recovery and discharge, important in day surgery; falls;
and paradoxical agitation, especially in children and the elderly.
It is therefore used cautiously or avoided in the elderly and frail,
in significant respiratory compromise and sleep apnoea,
where airway difficulty is anticipated and prompt cooperation may be needed,
and where rapid recovery is the priority.
So sedative premedication risks respiratory depression, oversedation,
delayed recovery, falls and paradoxical reactions,
and is avoided or minimised in the elderly, the respiratorily compromised,
and day-case and airway-difficulty settings.
How would you approach the choice of premedication for an individual patient?
I would individualise premedication to the patient and the procedure,
having assessed them.
I would identify the specific aims for that patient — anxiolysis for the very
anxious, analgesia as part of a multimodal plan,
antisialagogue for airway surgery or awake intubation,
aspiration prophylaxis for the at-risk, antiemesis for those prone to nausea,
stress-response attenuation for the cardiac patient — and select drugs accordingly,
rather than giving a routine premedicant.
I would weigh the risks, avoiding or minimising sedation in the elderly,
frail and respiratorily compromised and in day cases,
and emphasise non-pharmacological anxiolysis.
I would ensure essential regular medications are continued and others appropriately
adjusted.
So my approach is to define the specific aims for the individual,
choose targeted agents, balance their risks,
and combine them with non-pharmacological preparation and the appropriate
management of regular medications, reflecting the modern,
selective philosophy of premedication.
What is the place of melatonin as a premedicant?
Melatonin, the pineal hormone that regulates the sleep-wake cycle,
has been used as an anxiolytic premedicant,
particularly as an alternative to benzodiazepines.
It produces anxiolysis and mild sedation and improves sleep without, importantly,
the respiratory depression, the impairment of psychomotor recovery,
or the paradoxical agitation that limit the benzodiazepines,
which makes it attractive in the elderly, in children,
and where prompt recovery matters.
The evidence suggests it reduces preoperative anxiety with a favourable side-effect
profile, though it is perhaps less potent than midazolam.
It may also have a role in reducing emergence delirium and in preserving the sleep
cycle perioperatively.
So melatonin is a useful anxiolytic premedicant with a gentler profile than the
benzodiazepines, free of significant respiratory depression and recovery
impairment, valuable particularly in the elderly and children and where a
clear-headed recovery is wanted.
Describe the use of ketamine in premedication and as an adjunct.
Ketamine, acting principally by blocking the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor,
has uses spanning premedication and intraoperative adjunct.
As premedication, particularly in uncooperative or developmentally delayed
children, oral or intramuscular ketamine provides sedation and analgesia and can
facilitate a difficult induction where other approaches fail,
preserving airway and respiratory function.
As an intraoperative and perioperative adjunct,
low-dose ketamine provides analgesia and marked opioid sparing,
is useful in opioid-tolerant and chronic-pain patients,
and may reduce the development of chronic post-surgical pain through its effect on
central sensitisation; it also has a role in the management of acute severe asthma
and in depression.
Its drawbacks are the psychotomimetic emergence phenomena,
salivation and sympathetic stimulation.
So ketamine serves as a premedicant for the difficult paediatric induction and as a
valuable low-dose analgesic and opioid-sparing adjunct,
with emergence phenomena its main limitation.
How are corticosteroids managed perioperatively in the patient on long-term
steroids?
The patient on long-term corticosteroids may have a suppressed
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
so that they cannot mount the normal cortisol response to the stress of surgery,
risking an Addisonian crisis with hypotension.
The management is to continue their usual steroid and to provide additional
perioperative supplementation — steroid cover — scaled to the magnitude of surgery,
for example additional hydrocortisone at induction and for a period after major
surgery, with smaller or no supplementation for minor procedures,
according to guidelines.
The dose and duration of their usual steroid and the type of surgery determine the
regimen. Failure to provide cover risks cardiovascular collapse.
So the chronically steroid-treated patient has their steroid continued and receives
perioperative supplementation matched to the surgical stress,
to prevent an adrenal crisis, which is an important element of preoperative
pharmacological preparation.
How are diabetic medications managed around surgery?
Diabetic medications require careful perioperative adjustment to avoid both hyper-
and hypoglycaemia during fasting and surgical stress.
Insulin regimens are modified rather than stopped — long-acting insulin is usually
continued, often at a reduced dose,
and short-acting insulin adjusted around fasting,
with a variable-rate intravenous insulin infusion for major surgery,
prolonged fasting or poor control.
Among oral agents, metformin is usually continued for short procedures but withheld
where there is a risk of renal impairment or contrast,
because of the small risk of lactic acidosis;
the sulphonylureas are withheld on the day because of hypoglycaemia risk;
and the SGLT2 inhibitors are withheld for some days before surgery because of the
risk of euglycaemic ketoacidosis.
Glucose is monitored throughout. So diabetic medications are adjusted — insulin
reduced or given as an infusion, sulphonylureas and SGLT2 inhibitors withheld,
metformin continued cautiously — with glucose monitoring,
to maintain control safely while fasting.
What advice is given about herbal and over-the-counter preparations?
Herbal and over-the-counter preparations are commonly taken and often undisclosed,
yet several have perioperative implications,
so they should be specifically asked about.
Some increase bleeding — garlic, ginkgo,
ginger and fish oils have antiplatelet effects,
and they may add to that of antiplatelet drugs.
Some interact with anaesthesia or other drugs — St John's wort induces cytochrome
P450 enzymes, altering the metabolism of many drugs,
and may contribute to serotonin syndrome with serotonergic agents;
ephedra has sympathomimetic effects; kava and valerian add to sedation.
Many guidelines recommend stopping herbal preparations a week or two before surgery.
So patients should be asked about herbal and over-the-counter products,
which can increase bleeding, induce drug-metabolising enzymes,
or add to sedation or sympathetic effects,
and these are commonly stopped a week or two before surgery,
an easily overlooked aspect of preparation.
What pharmacological preparation is specific to awake fibreoptic intubation?
Awake fibreoptic intubation, used for the anticipated difficult airway,
requires specific pharmacological preparation to make it tolerable while keeping
the patient breathing and cooperative.
An antisialagogue, glycopyrronium, is given in advance to dry secretions,
which improves the view and the effect of topical local anaesthetic.
The airway is anaesthetised topically with local anaesthetic — by spray, nebuliser,
nerve blocks or spray-as-you-go — with attention to the total dose to avoid
toxicity.
Judicious sedation, classically with a titrated remifentanil infusion or
dexmedetomidine, provides comfort and some antitussive effect while preserving
spontaneous ventilation and cooperation,
avoiding oversedation and airway obstruction. Supplemental oxygen is given.
So awake fibreoptic intubation is prepared with an antisialagogue,
thorough topical airway anaesthesia within safe local-anaesthetic dose limits,
and careful sedation that preserves breathing,
the pharmacological foundation of a safe awake technique.
What are the considerations for premedication in the elderly?
The elderly require particular caution.
They are sensitive to the central effects of sedatives,
with a heightened risk of respiratory depression, oversedation, falls,
and postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction,
to which benzodiazepines and antimuscarinics that cross the blood-brain barrier,
such as hyoscine and atropine, particularly contribute.
So sedative premedication is minimised or avoided,
and centrally acting antimuscarinics are avoided in favour of glycopyrronium where
an antisialagogue is needed.
There is emphasis instead on non-pharmacological anxiolysis,
on the review and rationalisation of their often numerous regular medications —
with attention to anticoagulants, cardiovascular drugs and those increasing
delirium risk — and on the avoidance of polypharmacy.
Melatonin is a gentler anxiolytic option. So in the elderly,
premedication minimises sedatives and centrally acting antimuscarinics to reduce
delirium, respiratory depression and falls,
emphasises non-pharmacological measures,
and carefully manages their regular polypharmacy.
What is the relationship of fasting guidelines to premedication?
Preoperative fasting is a non-pharmacological but essential element of preparation
that sits alongside aspiration prophylaxis.
The standard guidance permits clear fluids until two hours before,
breast milk until four hours, and solids and other milk until six hours before
anaesthesia — the two-four-six rule — balancing the reduction of gastric contents
against the harms of prolonged fasting, which include discomfort, dehydration and,
particularly in children and the frail, metabolic upset.
Encouraging clear fluids up to two hours improves wellbeing without increasing
aspiration risk, and carbohydrate drinks are used in enhanced-recovery programmes.
Where gastric emptying is delayed or a full stomach is assumed,
pharmacological prophylaxis and rapid-sequence induction are added.
So fasting guidelines reduce gastric volume by the two-four-six rule while avoiding
the harms of excessive fasting, and premedication for aspiration prophylaxis
complements rather than replaces appropriate fasting.
How does the management of antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs feature in
preoperative preparation?
The management of antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs is a central part of
preoperative preparation, balancing the thrombotic risk of stopping against the
bleeding risk of continuing.
Aspirin for secondary prevention is often continued through surgery,
the bleeding risk being usually outweighed by the cardiovascular protection,
whereas the more potent P2Y12 inhibitors are generally stopped several days before,
in discussion with cardiology, particularly in the patient with a recent coronary
stent in whom premature cessation risks stent thrombosis.
Anticoagulants are stopped and, where necessary,
bridged according to the drug and the thrombotic risk.
The plan must also consider whether a regional or neuraxial technique is intended,
which imposes strict timing requirements.
So preoperative preparation includes a considered, often multidisciplinary,
plan for antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs,
weighing thrombosis against bleeding and accounting for any planned regional
technique, a frequent and important decision.
Summarise the modern philosophy of premedication.
The modern philosophy has moved decisively from the routine,
heavy sedative premedication of the past towards a selective,
individualised and multimodal approach.
Rather than giving every patient a sedative,
the anaesthetist defines the specific aims for the individual — anxiolysis for the
anxious, analgesia as part of a multimodal opioid-sparing plan,
antisialagogue for airway work, aspiration prophylaxis and antiemesis for the
at-risk, stress-response attenuation for the cardiac patient — and selects targeted
agents, while emphasising non-pharmacological anxiolysis and,
especially in the elderly and day cases,
minimising sedation to protect recovery and avoid delirium and respiratory
depression.
It integrates the careful management of regular medications.
So modern premedication is selective, individualised,
multimodal and recovery-conscious, using targeted drugs for defined aims alongside
non-pharmacological preparation and the appropriate handling of the patient's
regular medications, rather than a one-size sedative for all.
What pharmacological preparation is needed for the patient with a phaeochromocytoma?
The phaeochromocytoma, a catecholamine-secreting tumour,
demands meticulous pharmacological preparation as a form of premedication to
prevent dangerous intraoperative hypertensive surges.
The cardinal principle is to establish alpha-adrenoceptor blockade first,
with phenoxybenzamine or doxazosin, over days to weeks,
controlling the blood pressure and allowing the contracted intravascular volume to
re-expand.
Only after adequate alpha-blockade is a beta-blocker added if needed for
tachycardia or arrhythmia — never before,
because unopposed alpha stimulation from early beta-blockade can precipitate a
hypertensive crisis.
Adequate anxiolysis is also important,
since stress and anxiety can themselves trigger catecholamine release.
So preparation for phaeochromocytoma surgery is alpha-blockade before
beta-blockade, with volume repletion and good anxiolysis,
a specialised but classic example of pharmacological premedication preventing
perioperative catastrophe.
How is the malignant-hyperthermia-susceptible patient prepared?
The patient known or suspected to be susceptible to malignant hyperthermia is
prepared chiefly by avoidance and readiness rather than by a specific premedicant.
The triggering agents — the volatile anaesthetics and suxamethonium — are avoided
entirely, and a trigger-free anaesthetic is planned,
typically a total intravenous technique,
with the anaesthetic machine prepared appropriately to remove residual volatile
agent.
Dantrolene, the specific treatment,
must be immediately available with the personnel to mix and give it.
Anxiolytic premedication is appropriate,
since these patients are often anxious about their condition,
and benzodiazepines are safe and may help,
as stress is not itself a trigger but calm is beneficial.
Routine monitoring is augmented with temperature and end-tidal carbon dioxide.
So the malignant-hyperthermia-susceptible patient is prepared by avoiding triggers
and planning a trigger-free technique with dantrolene available,
with anxiolytic premedication as appropriate — preparation by avoidance and
readiness.
How should the patient's airway-disease medications be optimised before surgery?
The patient with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease should have their
condition optimised before elective surgery to reduce the risk of perioperative
bronchospasm and respiratory complications.
Their regular inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids are continued and brought
to theatre, and a bronchodilator may be given as premedication before induction.
Poorly controlled disease is optimised in advance,
with a course of oral corticosteroids and treatment of any infection,
and elective surgery deferred during an exacerbation.
Smoking cessation is encouraged. Those on long-term oral steroids may need
perioperative steroid cover.
The choice of anaesthetic technique then avoids airway irritants and ensures
adequate depth before airway instrumentation.
So the airway-disease patient is optimised by continuing and supplementing their
bronchodilators and steroids, treating exacerbations and deferring surgery if
uncontrolled, with bronchodilator premedication — an important element of
preparation to reduce perioperative bronchospasm.
How does obstructive sleep apnoea influence premedication?
Obstructive sleep apnoea markedly influences the approach to sedative
premedication, because these patients are exquisitely sensitive to the
respiratory-depressant and airway effects of sedatives and opioids,
which worsen upper-airway collapse and the apnoeas, risking severe hypoventilation,
obstruction and hypoxia, particularly before monitoring is established and in the
recovery period.
Sedative premedication is therefore minimised or avoided,
and if any sedation is used it is given only with monitoring.
Opioid-sparing multimodal analgesia is emphasised.
The alpha-two agonists, which provide sedation with less respiratory depression,
may be preferable adjuncts.
Their continuous positive airway pressure therapy is continued perioperatively.
So in obstructive sleep apnoea, sedative and opioid premedication is minimised
because of the heightened risk of airway obstruction and respiratory depression,
favouring non-sedating anxiolysis, opioid-sparing analgesia and the continuation of
positive-airway-pressure therapy — a key safety consideration.
How are the medications of the myasthenic patient managed perioperatively?
The patient with myasthenia gravis requires careful management of their disease
medications around surgery, because of the interplay with neuromuscular blockade.
Their anticholinesterase therapy, such as pyridostigmine, is generally continued,
though its dose may need adjustment,
and the anaesthetist must be aware that it affects the response to neuromuscular
blockers; immunosuppressants are continued, and corticosteroid cover considered.
The crucial point is that myasthenic patients are markedly sensitive to
non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers and may be resistant to suxamethonium,
so blockers are used sparingly, in reduced doses, with quantitative monitoring,
and sugammadex is valuable for reversal.
They are at risk of postoperative respiratory failure and may need planned
ventilatory support.
So the myasthenic patient's anticholinesterase and immunosuppressant therapy is
continued with adjustment, with great caution and monitoring around neuromuscular
blockade and anticipation of postoperative respiratory compromise — a specialised
aspect of perioperative drug management.
What are the perioperative implications of monoamine oxidase inhibitors,
lithium and other psychotropics?
Several psychotropic drugs have important perioperative implications.
The monoamine oxidase inhibitors interact dangerously with indirect
sympathomimetics such as ephedrine, risking a hypertensive crisis,
and with pethidine and other serotonergic drugs, risking serotonin syndrome,
so these interactions are avoided, using direct vasopressors cautiously and
avoiding the implicated drugs; the older irreversible agents may be continued with
these precautions or stopped well in advance, a decision made with psychiatry.
Lithium has a narrow therapeutic index,
interacts with diuretics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and prolongs
neuromuscular blockade, and its level should be checked,
with consideration of withholding it for major surgery with fluid shifts.
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are usually continued but increase
bleeding and serotonin-syndrome risk.
So monoamine oxidase inhibitors, lithium and serotonergic antidepressants carry
specific interaction risks — hypertensive crisis, serotonin syndrome,
prolonged blockade and bleeding — requiring informed management of these drugs
perioperatively.
Why is the timing of antiparkinsonian medication critical perioperatively?
In Parkinson's disease, the timing of medication is critical because these patients
depend on regular, frequent dosing of their drugs — chiefly levodopa — to maintain
mobility, swallowing and respiratory function,
and even short interruptions cause a marked deterioration, with rigidity,
immobility, swallowing and breathing difficulty,
and rarely a life-threatening akinetic crisis resembling neuroleptic malignant
syndrome.
So their medication must be continued with minimal disruption around surgery,
given at the usual times including on the morning of and as soon as possible after
surgery, by nasogastric tube or alternative routes if the oral route is
unavailable, since there are limited parenteral substitutes.
Drugs that worsen parkinsonism, particularly the dopamine-antagonist antiemetics
metoclopramide and prochlorperazine, are avoided,
using alternatives such as ondansetron or cyclizine.
So antiparkinsonian medication must be continued on schedule without interruption
to prevent deterioration, with dopamine-antagonist antiemetics avoided — a critical
timing issue in perioperative drug management.
What is the place of surgical antibiotic prophylaxis and its timing?
Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis is given to reduce surgical-site infection and is,
in effect, a pharmacological component of perioperative preparation often
administered by the anaesthetist.
Its central principle is timing: the antibiotic should be given so that adequate
tissue concentrations are present at the time of incision,
conventionally within the hour before incision,
and re-dosed in prolonged surgery or major blood loss.
The agent is chosen to cover the likely pathogens for the type of surgery,
according to local protocols, with attention to the patient's allergies — a careful
penicillin-allergy history being important to avoid both reaction and the
unnecessary use of less effective alternatives.
So surgical antibiotic prophylaxis is timed to achieve tissue levels at incision,
with the agent matched to the surgery and the patient's allergy status,
a routine but important pharmacological responsibility around induction that the
anaesthetist frequently delivers and must time correctly.
What advice is given about smoking and alcohol before surgery?
Both smoking and excessive alcohol increase perioperative risk,
and their cessation before surgery is beneficial.
Smoking impairs oxygen carriage through carboxyhaemoglobin,
increases airway reactivity and secretions, and impairs wound healing and immunity;
stopping even for a day or two reduces carboxyhaemoglobin,
while longer abstinence of weeks reduces respiratory complications,
so cessation is encouraged as early as possible,
and the preoperative visit is an opportunity to support it.
Chronic excessive alcohol affects the liver and its drug metabolism,
the cardiovascular and nervous systems, and clotting,
and carries a risk of perioperative withdrawal, which can be severe;
planned reduction or cessation before surgery and recognition and management of
withdrawal, sometimes with benzodiazepines, are important.
So patients are advised to stop smoking as early as possible before surgery for
respiratory and healing benefits, and to reduce alcohol,
with vigilance for withdrawal — modifiable risks addressed at the preoperative
assessment.
How does enhanced recovery influence preoperative preparation?
Enhanced recovery after surgery programmes have reshaped preoperative preparation
around the goal of maintaining physiological normality and reducing the stress of
surgery.
Relevant to premedication, they avoid prolonged fasting,
allowing clear fluids until two hours before and giving carbohydrate-rich drinks up
to two hours preoperatively, which reduces insulin resistance,
improves wellbeing and may shorten recovery.
They avoid routine long-acting sedative premedication that delays mobilisation,
favouring multimodal opioid-sparing analgesia begun preoperatively,
effective antiemetic prophylaxis, and optimisation of the patient's medical
conditions and nutrition in advance.
They emphasise patient information and engagement.
So enhanced recovery influences preparation by minimising fasting with preoperative
carbohydrate loading, avoiding recovery-delaying sedation in favour of multimodal
analgesia and antiemesis, and optimising the patient beforehand — a philosophy that
reinforces the modern, selective, recovery-conscious approach to premedication.
What particular non-pharmacological and pharmacological measures help children
separate and tolerate induction?
In children, the distress of separation from parents and of induction is a central
problem, addressed by combined non-pharmacological and pharmacological measures.
Non-pharmacologically, a calm, child-friendly environment,
parental presence at induction, play specialists, distraction with toys or screens,
and clear age-appropriate preparation are highly effective and reduce the need for
drugs.
Pharmacologically, oral midazolam provides anxiolysis and amnesia for the very
anxious, with ketamine or an alpha-two agonist as alternatives;
the alpha-two agonists also reduce emergence agitation.
A topical local anaesthetic cream — a eutectic mixture or amethocaine — is applied
well in advance to anaesthetise the skin so that cannulation is painless,
which greatly improves the child's experience and cooperation.
So children are helped to separate and tolerate induction by strong
non-pharmacological preparation with parental presence and distraction,
oral midazolam for the anxious, and topical local anaesthetic for painless
cannulation — the combination being more effective than drugs alone.
How does the choice of regional anaesthesia interact with premedication and
adjuncts?
The plan for regional or neuraxial anaesthesia interacts with premedication in
several ways. It influences the management of anticoagulant and antiplatelet drugs,
since strict timing is required to avoid vertebral canal haematoma,
which must be planned at the premedication stage.
It alters analgesic planning, the regional block forming the basis of multimodal,
opioid-sparing analgesia, with adjuncts such as the alpha-two agonists added to
prolong the block.
Sedation may be planned to accompany the block,
titrated to keep the patient comfortable yet cooperative and breathing.
Anxiolysis and clear explanation help the patient accept an awake or lightly
sedated technique. Antiemetic and aspiration considerations still apply.
So regional anaesthesia interacts with premedication through the timing of
anticoagulants, the central role of the block in multimodal analgesia with
adjuncts, the planning of accompanying sedation,
and the anxiolysis needed for an awake technique — integrating the block into the
overall pharmacological plan.
How are anticholinesterases and pyridostigmine considerations balanced in the
context of premedication adjuncts more broadly?
Anticholinesterase drugs feature in premedication and adjunct considerations in two
ways. In myasthenia gravis, the patient's regular pyridostigmine is part of the
medication plan, balanced against its effect on neuromuscular blockade.
More broadly, the anticholinesterases and the antimuscarinics they are paired with
illustrate the autonomic balancing that runs through premedication:
antimuscarinics such as glycopyrronium are given to block unwanted vagal effects
and dry secretions, while excessive antimuscarinic effect causes tachycardia,
dry mouth and, with centrally acting agents, confusion.
The anaesthetist tailors this autonomic manipulation to the patient — drying
secretions for airway work, blocking vagal reflexes where bradycardia is
anticipated, yet avoiding central antimuscarinic effects in the elderly.
So anticholinesterase and antimuscarinic considerations reflect the wider theme of
autonomic balancing in premedication,
individualised to provide the wanted drying and vagal blockade while avoiding the
harms of excess, particularly in vulnerable patients.
What is the value of a structured preoperative assessment in delivering rational
premedication?
The structured preoperative assessment is the foundation on which rational
premedication rests, because the selective,
individualised approach depends on knowing the patient.
The assessment identifies the patient's anxieties, comorbidities and their control,
current medications and allergies, airway and aspiration risk,
and the planned surgery and anaesthetic,
from which the specific aims of premedication and the necessary adjustments to
regular drugs are derived.
It allows optimisation in advance — of airway disease, diabetes,
anticoagulation and other conditions — and the planning of multimodal analgesia,
antiemetic prophylaxis and aspiration precautions.
It is also the opportunity for non-pharmacological anxiolysis through information
and reassurance, and for shared decision-making.
So a structured preoperative assessment enables rational premedication by defining
the individual's aims and risks, optimising comorbidities and medications in
advance, and providing the information and reassurance that are themselves powerful
anxiolytics — turning premedication from a routine into a tailored plan.
Summarise, finally, the categories of pharmacological adjunct used through the
perioperative period.
Drawing it together, the pharmacological adjuncts span the whole perioperative
period.
Before surgery: anxiolytics such as midazolam or melatonin, antisialagogues,
analgesic premedicants, aspiration prophylaxis, antiemetic prophylaxis,
antibiotic prophylaxis, thromboprophylaxis,
and the considered continuation or adjustment of regular medications.
During surgery: analgesic adjuncts — paracetamol,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, ketamine, lidocaine, magnesium,
alpha-two agonists; antiemetics such as dexamethasone and ondansetron;
agents to attenuate the stress response such as beta-blockers,
alpha-two agonists and remifentanil; and regional techniques.
After surgery: multimodal analgesia, antiemetics including take-home cover,
and the restarting of regular and thromboprophylactic drugs.
All are deployed selectively, multimodally and with attention to the individual and
to recovery.
So the perioperative adjuncts form a continuum — anxiolysis, analgesia, antiemesis,
aspiration and infection prophylaxis,
stress-response attenuation and medication management — applied throughout,
embodying the modern, individualised,
multimodal philosophy of premedication and adjunctive pharmacology.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The aims of premedication are summarised as the A's: anxiolysis, amnesia,
analgesia, antisialagogue, antiemesis,
antacid/aspiration prophylaxis and attenuation of autonomic responses — plus
reducing anaesthetic requirement and continuing essential regular drugs;
modern practice is selective, not routine.
Second, Benzodiazepines (chiefly oral/IV midazolam) give anxiolysis and amnesia
without analgesia, limited by sedation,
respiratory depression (especially with opioids and in the elderly) and paradoxical
reactions; alpha-2 agonists (clonidine,
dexmedetomidine) add analgesia and stress-response attenuation with little
respiratory depression.
Third, Antisialagogues (glycopyrronium preferred — no central effects,
less tachycardia than atropine) dry secretions for airway work and block vagal
reflexes; analgesia is pre-emptive and multimodal (paracetamol, NSAIDs, regional),
with gabapentinoids now used cautiously.
Fourth, Paediatric premedication relies on oral midazolam (ketamine and alpha-2
agonists as alternatives), topical local anaesthetic for cannulation,
and strong non-pharmacological preparation with parental presence.
Fifth, Continue most regular medications (beta-blockers,
clonidine to avoid rebound) but adjust anticoagulants,
antidiabetic drugs (and SGLT2 inhibitors), corticosteroids,
and often omit ACE inhibitors/ARBs and diuretics on the day;
avoid or minimise sedative premedication in the elderly, frail,
respiratorily compromised and day-case patients.
Thank you. That concludes the station.